Hey everybody, welcome to the Menlo Midweek Podcast.
We are so glad you could join us today.
My name is Matt.
And I'm Phil.
And I am not Mark Mornishi, our previous host, but that's okay because Mark is on to more amazing things, but we're still diving in into the podcast today.
So if you're just joining us for the first time ever, we talk about a bunch of different things here.
Mostly we talk about what our church is talking about, big conversations at our messages or our sermons, but sometimes we dive into some other fun topics.
Last Sunday, Phil, we jumped into a new series titled, I Am The God Who Gets Close.
And so I just want to ask you, Phil, if someone's listening who's never really given church much thought, or maybe they've assumed God is distant or disappointed, what's one thing from this message that you'd want them to lean in and consider?
I think that oftentimes the way we think about church today and oftentimes the thing that becomes most off-putting for people who are not in church is that
I have to be perfect.
I have to have it all put together.
And not just the conversation that we had this last weekend with Moses, but over and over and over again, the universal principle in the Bible is that the people that God chooses to get close to are sinful.
They're broken.
They make mistakes.
And the great news of hope that God makes available to us is that that is basically the assumed baseline situation
of all people for God to love us."
So you're like, well, God only loves perfect people.
Actually, God does not love any perfect people because none of those people exist.
He only loves broken people.
And so the more broken you are, hopefully that maybe just piques your interest to go, could that really be true?
And what we say is that the hope of heaven and the love of God for you is honestly too good not to be true.
Like I think our hearts call out to it.
It's a beautiful sentiment and something that I hope resonates with anyone, wherever they are in the spectrum of spirituality.
So this Sunday, we focus in on the story of Moses.
Now, if you haven't read scripture before, it's a pretty big one.
But if you've never seen the movie, The Prince of Egypt, go rethink your life choices because it is one of the most celebrated animated vignettes around
uh, one of the most notable stories within scripture that's so profound and so important.
So, um, so you have homework from this podcast.
It is go, go and watch that.
Go watch an animated film.
Yes.
That seems like an easy lift, but you can do it.
Yeah.
But it's, I mean, fantastic movie.
I saw it in theaters.
Um, I'm pretty sure my mom started praying halfway through the movie because she thought it was so good.
But anyway, um, great story.
So, I mean, you mentioned in that, um, you said this line that God didn't speak.
until Moses stopped.
This is Moses, I think, connecting with that burning bush, that profound image right there.
And so I would just say, in 2026, we have AI assistants, we have optimized calendars, we have noise everywhere.
What does turning aside practically look like?
Yeah, I think that if you don't live in Silicon Valley, this may be something you will pretty quickly see us true, but don't live with as much as those of us who are in Silicon Valley live with.
which is we are in the attention economy, like we are.
And what I give my attention to, I will eventually give my affection to.
And God knows that too.
And I think that there are so many different things that are beeping and buzzing and clamoring for our attention.
And I don't think that God wants to be one of those beeping and buzzing.
And you know, like, I think that the burning bush is about as,
you know, bright as it's going to get.
And even that, as I mentioned this weekend, was kind of subtle, like seeing a bush like that wasn't new, seeing one of them on fire probably wasn't new.
It was like this double take of like, wait a second, that one's not burning up.
And I think that for our relationship and conversation with God, he is usually trying to get our attention first because he wants our affection.
But I think that oftentimes he's going to function at the pace at which we are willing
to listen that we are willing to pay attention.
Now, I will say if you're a follower of Jesus, I think that's often true for someone that's not a follower of Jesus.
I think if you're a follower of Jesus, what the Bible says is that those the Lord loves He corrects like a loving parent.
And so I think God starts with subtlety.
And then I think if you're a follower of Jesus, and especially if you're living in active disobedience to the way of Jesus, it may feel really frustrating in the moment,
but it's actually out of love that he's gonna bring correction to you.
So I think it's a little bit, there's some subtlety in it, but I do think it's important to recognize all the things in our life that are trying to get our attention, trying to get our attention, trying to get our attention, all the ways that we're multitasking, they're having a deforming impact on our ability to focus on anything, certainly including God.
And I would just hope that if you're here on this,
just recognize that we are being formed and shaped every single moment by different things.
There is a formational force that exists in our world upon our souls.
And so I resonate with that deeply.
And I think too, I am so overwhelmed and distracted.
God would have to set my car on fire for me, for me to know that like, Oh, I think something's wrong.
Maybe I should pay attention.
And if it was the Honda, I'm sure that would even wear it.
Honestly, it might be a gift.
Oh God, thank you so much for setting this.
2008 Honda on fire.
I wondered what to do with it.
Although it would be, it would be a problem if it never went out.
Yeah, that I mean, well, and honestly with hybrid batteries, it might not.
Yeah, yeah, absolutely.
It might be a bigger problem.
But yeah, I think God finds really creative ways to get our attention and what we do with that matters so much.
How is it landing on us and what is it catalyzing within us?
And Moses, I don't think he was a young man when he experienced that moment.
It was something that was kind of far on for him.
And I think there's something there.
Moses had
He just had a pretty robust life up to that point.
And I think when I'm thinking about now is just kind of his age and status and experience.
And so like, what are we supposed to do when we feel like we've arrived or further along in life and we encounter something that can radically change and or disorient us at our age and stage?
How do we reconcile?
Well, no, I've arrived.
I've made it already.
How are we supposed to hear God in that when maybe we're so entrenched?
in our own trajectory.
Yeah, I think a lot of the markers that we have for what success looks like in 2026 prioritize wealth over wisdom.
Yeah.
And I think that for the most part, when we look at the trajectory in scripture, certainly if you go look at proverbs, but I think it's more broadly applicable wider than that.
The scripture actually values wisdom over wealth.
And so I think some of it is moving the north star of what we define as success.
If we define wealth as success, I think part of the challenge is that wealth is relative.
So it's always funny when you read the surveys about people at different income levels when you say, Hey, what number would you need to make to feel rich?
And every person puts a number bigger than what they have that the goalposts just keep moving.
And then there's a group of people that I think they would say,
Uh, you know what?
I have arrived.
My startup got acquired.
We went public.
I mean, there are people in the valley that they have more money than they could spend in multiple lifetimes.
And I think that's like the dog that caught the car moment of they're chasing it.
They're chasing it.
They're chasing is instinctive.
They catch it and they're going like, Oh, now what?
And I think that wealth is oftentimes when, especially when wealth is disconnected from wisdom,
Wealth becomes very consuming.
What do I consume?
What do I get out of it?
When it's applied with wisdom or when we have wisdom, maybe even without wealth, it becomes generative.
It can help other people.
It can be a blessing and a benefit.
And when I build my life with a north start of wisdom, I think there's this beautiful expression where, you know, I've talked about this a lot lately that I think we've never been at a time where information is more readily available.
Information is just content, right?
And we have more content being created in any moment than at every moment ever.
It's why all these, you know, crazy technology things are happening all around us, but that knowledge, which is true information, that takes curation.
It takes us figuring it out.
You can't just take all information at face value.
And then underneath that is wisdom, which is knowledge applied in real life.
So information, wisdom, or information, knowledge, wisdom, I think wisdom's never been more rare.
And wisdom is one of those things that I think if we prioritize it in our life, we get better with age, right?
Like actually like a fine wine.
You can sit down with someone who is 20 something years old with a teenager and you're in your 70s and you're in your 80s.
And by the grace of God, you're going, you know what?
Let me tell you that story about the time that I walked through something like what you're walking through.
Yeah, circumstances were different.
We didn't have, you know, cars that drove themselves yet.
You know, I was driving stick.
Yeah, I lived in a different part of the country, but wisdom is wisdom because wisdom is just knowledge applied.
So I think a core to it for me is how do I make sure in my own life and in my own spiritual formation that wisdom is the leading marker of my spiritual maturity.
And I don't allow wealth and the deformative nature of success in the Valley and in the Western culture in general.
Take shape.
Yeah, that's great.
I mean, wealth influence power, all of those things.
They exist in every
paradigm around us just at different scales.
So if you're listening and you're like, oh, I knew there was artificial intelligence, just be reassured there is no artificial wisdom.
Like that doesn't happen.
Yeah, we need to have the pain.
And I mean, if you think about what AI is doing, even if you were to ask AI for wisdom, all it's doing, and I mean, we've talked about this before, all AI is doing in any expression of it right now.
It's a large language model.
It's machine learning.
It's taking a whole bunch of stuff that's been
put inside of it as its sort of sample source, and it's giving you a predictive answer based on probability.
So it may have a photocopy of a photocopy of a photocopy, but it has never had to live out the lessons of information curated to knowledge applied in life.
And I think that's one of those areas that as image bearers of the creator of the universe, that makes us distinct.
When I share wisdom with someone, that's wisdom that I've learned the hard way.
I didn't read 7,000 books and I'm giving you the average of those 7,000 books.
That's what a chatbot is giving you.
Yeah.
So yeah, it's way more informative than it is experiential.
And the, the, the human wiring imparted by God into us of, of emotion and, and grief and gladness and goodness, like all those things that we carry, like there's no artificial expression of that.
And I think that the, you know, you talked about the influence nature
I think that influencer culture too has distorted wisdom a little bit where I think about like the Manosphere stuff where you have these guys that are like, oh, we'll tell you how to be this amazing, you know, very attractive, very successful individual.
And they purport wisdom.
And I think people are so hungry for wisdom.
They'll take fake wisdom as long as it's said confidently.
Yeah.
And then you come out and you realize like, oh, Andrew Tate is like, turns out, not a great guy, you know?
Like, oh, that's awful.
And I think wisdom is best shared in relationship.
And so this idea of like, well, how do I get a platform and how do I have even more people listen to me?
And I mean, that's ironic for me to say because we're talking into microphones that's going on podcast.
But I would say like the best wisdom that I give is with my kids.
It's like face to face.
It's time with them because they know me.
They know.
If the person that they're hearing on stage or that they hear in a recording is the same person that walks into the house or not, are we consistent people?
And when we have consistent people in our life and they share wisdom with us, I think we should significantly prioritize that wisdom in the way we live our lives.
Yeah, that's great.
And there is a hunger for wisdom out there.
And I see it showing up in unusual places.
And a lot of the stuff that's out there, like the hunger analogy sticks with me, like, I think we are settling.
for just like cat food when we could be having like a full meal in the process.
But it takes times, you have to cook it, you know?
Like it's not gonna be ready made.
Like you gotta go through that.
So that just resonates with it.
Well, I think that's a great metaphor because how often do you let yourself get so hungry that you're willing to settle because you haven't actually done it when you anticipate the need for the food, right?
So the right time for wisdom is actually before you need it.
It's to be able to go, hey, I've,
a college decision coming up.
Oh, you know what?
I'm sensing some things in my workplace that there is something confusing about what's being asked of me here.
I see these changes coming in the world of my industry.
I want to talk to somebody about that.
Our family's going through a big milestone.
Let me go find somebody that I know that I have close relationship with and just ask for their counsel.
Ask for them to pray with me.
Ask that they would share with me what God has taught them in this season.
when we don't do that and we get to the panic moment, that's when we're looking for like the wisdom, microwavable burrito that we would have never thought about one time before.
But now we're just like, I'm starving, like I have to do something.
And this is what's most dangerous for me.
I don't know if you do this.
I get to a point in the day where I know it's like kind of too late for me to eat lunch.
And I know like if I eat lunch, I won't be hungry for dinner and then I'm gonna have a problem in my marriage.
And so if I let it go too long, I actually don't eat.
And I wonder in our own pursuit of wisdom, if there are these moments where it's like, well, I've actually waited too long.
I don't really know where to get information.
So I'm just going to hit the easy button.
I'm going to do my instinct.
I'm going to ask a technological tool to outsource my brain development or my spiritual formation.
And I'll just get to the next thing.
So I do think that idea
How do we anticipate what we need and make space for relationship and wisdom before the information's mission critical?
Yeah, that's great.
And I think too, you mentioned in the message that you had a section about the desert trying to rename us, failure, divorce, burnout.
And I think like that the desert can be a diagnostic for how we need wisdom.
And so I would just say like, what are you seeing right now?
That is a desert name that people are carrying like how are you?
What are you experiencing?
Who are you talking to?
How you feeling that right now?
Yeah, I think that we're watching a level of disruption that we've never seen in my lifetime That when someone asks especially someone asks you professionally hey, what do you do for?
I mean the history of the world certainly in the post-industrial revolution era the answer to that question
What you're answering is who am I?
What do you do?
It shouldn't be that way.
That actually shouldn't be your identity, but we settled for it.
I'm a sales guy.
I'm an executive.
I'm an electrician.
I'm a homemaker.
I'm like, whatever you're answering, I'm a professor.
You're answering identity.
And so in the world of like, well, what happens if your job, what happens if your industry radically changes or goes away?
Well, what is that?
If my job is my identity and this thing is going to take away my job, does that take away my identity?
And so I think that idea of a false identity being exposed, I think that's really big right now.
And to be able to recognize what does it look like to aim higher?
We've talked about this before, but we all have an identity.
At Menlo, we talk about this a lot.
Our mission at Menlo is bringing hope to everyone by living out our identity in Christ every day.
You're a love child of God.
created in his image with infinite dignity, value, and worth broken for sure in need of healing, hope, and heaven, absolutely.
But those things can't be taken away from you.
That's primary.
And then from there, we have our calling.
Our calling is usually wrapped up in our gifts and our abilities.
And so what is that?
Have you spent time identifying that?
For me, if I wasn't at Menlo, I would be working to hopefully bring health and healing
to a community of faith of some kind.
Like that is actually my calling.
And then within my calling is my assignment.
And my assignment right now is the lead pastor of Menlo Church.
And by God's grace, it will be for decades to come.
But I have to understand that.
And what I think happens is we just collapse those down in my specific assignment right now.
the job that I work at, the job that I'm in, the job that I want, right?
Those all become my identity.
If I haven't worked that out.
And so I mean, I think that can even just be an individual exercise.
If you haven't spent time doing it, just get on a piece of paper, right?
Identity, calling, assignment.
How would you fill out each one of those?
Because I think that can help us undergird those lies of, oh man, here's my name.
No, no, no, your name is child of God.
Your identity is
your future is secured in heaven because of Jesus.
And once you know that, I think all of a sudden we can walk into the uncertainty of our moment with a much greater level of certainty for our future on identity.
That's beautiful.
And so, yeah, homework would be identity calling assignment, like map those out.
And I also think too.
In addition to the animated movie.
Well, yeah, I would say maybe you're watching Prince of Egypt.
I mean, you could.
Yeah, you know, it might be helpful.
Maybe you'll get inspired so well.
Sure.
But I do think like,
An area that I've seen that lived out was have an opportunity to pastor at a Mountain View campus for a little while in the early 2020s, right around the time that some tech companies were imploding.
I was talking to people who were on all sides of the career spectrum, some who did the lily pad thing and jumped every two years, and some who had spent 25 years at the same company, and both of them had the same exact looks in their eyes when they said, yeah, I was, I got part of a reduction in force,
I'm between jobs right now.
And the funny thing is like, the thing that I immediately identified as like a threat, it were were I to be in their shoes of like, well, how am I going to sustain my livelihood?
And like for the most of the individuals that I talked to, as an amazing provisional blessing, they had time to figure it out.
But that didn't actually like help them at all.
And what 100% did help them was showing up
on Friday mornings at six in the morning to eat a bagel and have a cup of coffee with a group of guys who said like this is what's going on in my life right now and I need some other men around me and I need to be prayed for because I am unmoored.
I haven't taken the time to identify like the gifts and wireings in myself.
I've just equated who I am with what I do.
And it is like a sword through the soul separating them from who they are.
And yet I am so pleased to say
that all of the individuals that I connected with during that time, like God did work in them.
Like I watched it happen firsthand because they were committed to identifying who they were as a child of God and within the sense of community that they so desperately needed.
Yeah, I mean, I just think that there are so many potential idols that our flesh wants and that the enemy of our soul and that a broken sinful system in our world wants to deform our identity into, right?
So I think our
our situation, you know, our job, where we live, all that stuff, our status.
I also think another one of those that I see a lot is the season that you're in.
So like an easy one is when you're a student and you graduate and you just look into the world of the unknown, but you have identified as a student.
And that one feels, that one still feels like a positive change, but it's scary, right?
Because
If you're not careful, your assignment was that you were a student.
That was never your calling, it was never your identity.
And then I think a big one I see for people who, their primary assignment for a long time is at home with kids or for parents in general, when kids graduate or move out, I think that, like it's so easy for that thing, especially in church culture to become your identity.
You are a mom.
you are a dad, but actually your primary identity is a son or a daughter, not a mom or a dad.
And to be able to say, hey, before you love your son or daughter, God did.
And God loves your son or daughter infinitely more than you ever can.
I just think that stuff, the sooner we can do some of that substructure work, the better
because if we wait, it's gonna be hard no matter what.
Like I'm saying all the stuff and I'm telling you, it'll be really hard when kids move out of our house.
Like I don't wanna minimize that.
But I think recognizing your season, your situation, your status, all those things are competing and sort of trying to climb up from your assignment right now to your identity forever.
And if you let them climb that tree, it may feel good in the moment, circumstantially,
but it will be short-lived.
You will be very, very frustrated if you let it stay there.
Yeah.
Yeah, there's, I mean, there's so much to dive into there because there's pain out there waiting for us in some way.
How can we be preemptively preparing for that?
So I would just say kind of a closing question for you.
If someone's in the Bay Area and they're chasing the idea of arrival, optimizing life, maybe they're spiritually skeptical and they've heard nothing else
that from Sunday or from a Sunday that's coming, what would you want them to wrestle with this week?
What do you want people to wrestle with this week?
I think the places of your life that you think God is least interested in, he is just as present, just as close as any other area.
So the illusion of when I show up to church, God's like waiting for me and he has something special and unique, he wants to do there that he can't do somewhere else.
It may be that God does something unique for you, but I think a lot of times when God does something unique in my mind or in my heart in a gathering of worship, it actually has a lot more to do with my attitude walking in than it even does with what's happening.
I would say like, there's always two sermons getting preached.
There's the one that like you, me, or another communicator are preaching.
And then we've prepared and hopefully the Lord's spoken into
But then there's the sermon that you are individually hearing.
And I'd say sometimes in my life, those are two radically different sermons.
You know, it's like, I can walk away and go, I'm not even sure what they said, but I know, I got notes about what God was leaning in.
And for a lot of it, it's because it's the first time that week that the rest of the world really has just shut off for 30 minutes.
And I've had a minute to process and think and, you know, have really a centering experience, but
It's not because God's not interested in your commute.
It's not because God's not interested in the conflict in your marriage.
It's not because God's not interested in the difficult major decision you have at work.
It's not because God's not interested even in the ordinary things that feel boring to you.
He's just as interested and just as present in all of it.
And so the peak moment you think about spiritually in your life to the thing that feels the most boring, I would just challenge you this week.
Just remember,
God is with you, God is near, whether you know him or not, as you do that like really silly thing, or as you do that thing, you're so glad that nobody else sees.
That's a secret that's hidden.
It's not hidden from him.
And I don't say that to shame anyone or to guilt anyone.
It's an invitation that the God of the universe who loves you, who actually made you in his image.
You're an image bearer, no matter what you think about Jesus.
And that should be an invitation, hopefully through this series to say, if he was willing to go to these kinds of lengths to be this close, what might I do in response?
Yeah, it's great.
And that I think speaks against the cultural narrative of like, just listen to this podcast or just take this medication or just do this.
Like sometimes there aren't quick fixes for this, but God sees you and knows you.
And I just hope that's given you hope.
Yeah.
And I would say,
The thing that I've tried to get better about even personally, because like I'm, I live in this culture.
I'm susceptible to all of this.
I like technology.
I'm a highly productive person.
I like listen to things.
I mean, it's easy for assignment to climb to calling to come to identity for me.
So this is everybody thing.
Um, but one of the things I've tried to do just as an adjustment is I, I listen to a lot less stuff, uh, which is a big deal for me.
I'm dyslexic.
So I listen to books usually before I read them, uh, helps me read them faster.
or I'll like listen to podcast or whatever.
And so I will quite regularly have it, you know, earbud in and I'm listening to something.
And so whether that's on a drive to go pick up my daughter in Sunnyvale or, you know, a walk where I'm going somewhere downtown or whatever, I'm trying to be more present in the moment, present to what God might be doing in the lives of people around me, how I might be able to pray.
And then also to just like,
Actually, sort of for me, I think, now this is a little bit of expositional gymnastics here, so don't hold me biblically accountable to this.
I think that if the burning bush happened today, God would yell through our noise-canceling headphones, take your AirPods out.
I think the equivalent of take your sandals off would be take your AirPods out.
So I'm just trying to live that out in my life.
Maybe that's a word you need, I don't know.
But I think, you know, at a minimum, listen to what you're listening to slower.
Your brain is not a machine.
It's not designed to function at the speed of computers.
And I think that it's easier to hear God when there's space to listen.
And we give affection to what we give attention to.
That lands with me.
personally.
So thanks, Phil.
Just just great.
Yeah.
In an era where our cars drive for us.
So we're able to text or do anything else.
And then we're listening to books or music at 2x speed for no reason.
Just because we need to get it quicker.
I mean, yeah, that's that is a counter narrative right there to conventional wisdom.
I just like there.
All of those things, there are cultural stories that we're believing about ourselves, that we're believing about the world around us, that it's like, well, if I don't do this then, well then what?
What are you so convinced will happen or will not happen?
And I just think we have to be careful that we don't, we're so concerned about the machines taking over.
And I think we probably need to be more concerned, at least in the short term, about pretending to become machines ourselves.
because it doesn't matter how hard you're pretending, it will not work.
Yeah, that's great.
Good reminder for me to lean in this week.
Hope it's a good reminder for you as well.
So if you're listening and you want to lean in more and you'd like to know more, visit menlo.church.
We've got some great resources listed there for you, including a daily reading plan to help center your soul, whether it's the morning or the evening during the Lenten season.
You can click on the link that's there.
Or if you already have the U version app installed, just look up Menlo Church and see the IM series.
If you have prayer or any questions that you want to throw our way, you can text our team 650.
600 0402.
Thanks for joining us.
Peace.
See you everybody.